documentation/blender_pointcloud_colors.md, before:

# Visualizing Colored Point Clouds in Blender (4.x) and glTF 2.0 Export

These instructions show how to display per-point colors from a `.ply` **Point Cloud object** in Blender.

---

## 1. Geometry Nodes Setup

1. Select your imported **Point Cloud object**.
2. Add a **Geometry Nodes modifier** → click **New**.
3. In the *Geometry Node Editor*, build this node tree:

**Nodes to add**
- Instance on Points
- Ico Sphere (Mesh Primitive)
- Realize Instances
- Set Material
- Group Input (already there)
- Group Output (already there)

**Connections**
```
Group Input.Geometry
  → Instance on Points.Points

Ico Sphere.Mesh
  → Instance on Points.Instance

Instance on Points.Instances
  → Realize Instances.Geometry

Realize Instances.Geometry
  → Set Material.Geometry

Set Material.Geometry
  → Group Output.Geometry
```

**Settings**
- **Ico Sphere → Subdivisions**: 1–2 (start with 1 for speed)
- **Ico Sphere → Radius**: `0.005–0.02` (adjust as needed)
- **Instance on Points → Pick Instance**: OFF

(Optional: If your `.ply` has a `"radius"` attribute, you can pipe it into *Instance on Points → Scale* using a **Named Attribute** node and **Capture Attribute** node.)

![A view of the Geometry Nodes for instancing primitives for each point in a point cloud.](image-1.png)

---

## 2. Material Setup

1. Create a **New Material** in the Shader Editor.
2. Keep the **Principled BSDF** node.
3. Add an **Attribute** node (`Shift+A → Input → Attribute`).

**Connections**
```
Attribute("Col").Color
  → Principled BSDF.Base Color

Principled BSDF.BSDF
  → Material Output.Surface
```

![A view of the Shading nodes for setting up material properties in Blender.](image.png)

**Notes**
- The attribute name is usually `"Col"`, but check **Object Data Properties → Attributes** for the exact name (case-sensitive).
- If colors look dim, add an **Emission** node and mix it with the Principled BSDF.

---

## 3. Viewport & Render Checklist

- Switch to **Material Preview** or **Rendered** mode.
- Ensure the **Geometry Nodes modifier** is enabled.
- Ensure the **Set Material** node uses your new material.
- If still gray:
  - Double-check attribute name (`Col`, `color`, etc.).
  - Test by plugging `Attribute → Color` directly into an **Emission → Color**.

---

## Minimal Node Summary

**Geometry Nodes**
```
Group Input → Instance on Points → Realize Instances → Set Material → Group Output
Ico Sphere → Instance on Points
```

**Material**
```
Attribute("Col") → Principled BSDF.Base Color → Material Output.Surface
```

---

## 4. Exporting to glTF

1. Select the point cloud objects (and any supporting meshes) you need in the export.
2. Go to `File → Export → glTF 2.0 (.glb/.gltf)`.
3. In the export dialog, choose a filename and destination.
4. Under **Format**, pick `glTF Binary (.glb)` for a single file or `glTF Separate (.gltf + .bin + textures)` if you prefer external assets.
5. Under **Include**, enable **Selected Objects** so only your chosen assets are exported.
6. Under **Mesh**, enable **Apply Modifiers** to bake the Geometry Nodes output.
7. Still under **Mesh**, under **Vertex Colors** ensure **All Vertex Colors** is enabled so per-point colors are written.
8. Check **Compression** box to shrink file size during export (adjust the level if needed, 6 is maximum compression value).
9. Click **Export glTF 2.0**.

![The export dialog window for glTF options in Blender 4.x. The settings have been optimized for point cloud export.](image-2.png)

> After export, review `documentation/gltf-transform-workflow.md` for optional gltf-transform steps to post-process or compress the file and greatly reduce file size.

Commit message:

Added importing and scaling instructions in the point cloud markdown.

documentation/blender_pointcloud_colors.md, after:

# Visualizing Colored Point Clouds in Blender (4.x) and glTF 2.0 Export

These instructions show how to display per-point colors from a `.ply` **Point Cloud object** in Blender.

---

## 0. Import, Scale, and Center the Point Cloud

1. In a new Blender scene, set `Properties → Scene → Units` to `Metric` with `Unit Scale = 1.0` so measurements are in meters.

![The right-hand Properties panel in Blender. You can set the units here.](image-3.png)

2. Import the point cloud via `File → Import → Stanford PLY (.ply)` and select the file.
3. With the point cloud object selected, adjust the **Scale** values so the bounding box reflects real-world meters (e.g., data in centimeters → scale by `0.01`), then apply it with `Ctrl+A → Scale`.

![The Blender viewport showing an example of an imported point cloud and the Transform panel on the right-hand side.](image-4.png)

4. Press `Shift+C` to reset the 3D cursor to the world origin, then choose `Object → Set Origin → Origin to Geometry` to place the object’s origin at its center.

![The Object menu within Blender's viewport. You can choose the origin of the cursor here.](image-5.png)

5. Snap the point cloud to the origin with `Shift+S → Selection to Cursor`, and apply the location (`Ctrl+A → Location`) if you want zeroed transforms before continuing.

![The Shift+S circular menu on Blender's viewport.](image-6.png)

## 1. Geometry Nodes Setup

1. Select your imported **Point Cloud object**.
2. Add a **Geometry Nodes modifier** → click **New**.
3. In the *Geometry Node Editor*, build this node tree:

**Nodes to add**
- Instance on Points
- Ico Sphere (Mesh Primitive)
- Realize Instances
- Set Material
- Group Input (already there)
- Group Output (already there)

**Connections**
```
Group Input.Geometry
  → Instance on Points.Points

Ico Sphere.Mesh
  → Instance on Points.Instance

Instance on Points.Instances
  → Realize Instances.Geometry

Realize Instances.Geometry
  → Set Material.Geometry

Set Material.Geometry
  → Group Output.Geometry
```

**Settings**
- **Ico Sphere → Subdivisions**: 1–2 (start with 1 for speed)
- **Ico Sphere → Radius**: `0.005–0.02` (adjust as needed)
- **Instance on Points → Pick Instance**: OFF

(Optional: If your `.ply` has a `"radius"` attribute, you can pipe it into *Instance on Points → Scale* using a **Named Attribute** node and **Capture Attribute** node.)

![A view of the Geometry Nodes for instancing primitives for each point in a point cloud.](image-1.png)

---

## 2. Material Setup

1. Create a **New Material** in the Shader Editor.
2. Keep the **Principled BSDF** node.
3. Add an **Attribute** node (`Shift+A → Input → Attribute`).

**Connections**
```
Attribute("Col").Color
  → Principled BSDF.Base Color

Principled BSDF.BSDF
  → Material Output.Surface
```

![A view of the Shading nodes for setting up material properties in Blender.](image.png)

**Notes**
- The attribute name is usually `"Col"`, but check **Object Data Properties → Attributes** for the exact name (case-sensitive).
- If colors look dim, add an **Emission** node and mix it with the Principled BSDF.

---

## 3. Viewport & Render Checklist

- Switch to **Material Preview** or **Rendered** mode.
- Ensure the **Geometry Nodes modifier** is enabled.
- Ensure the **Set Material** node uses your new material.
- If still gray:
  - Double-check attribute name (`Col`, `color`, etc.).
  - Test by plugging `Attribute → Color` directly into an **Emission → Color**.

---

## Minimal Node Summary

**Geometry Nodes**
```
Group Input → Instance on Points → Realize Instances → Set Material → Group Output
Ico Sphere → Instance on Points
```

**Material**
```
Attribute("Col") → Principled BSDF.Base Color → Material Output.Surface
```

---

## 4. Exporting to glTF

1. Select the point cloud objects (and any supporting meshes) you need in the export.
2. Go to `File → Export → glTF 2.0 (.glb/.gltf)`.
3. In the export dialog, choose a filename and destination.
4. Under **Format**, pick `glTF Binary (.glb)` for a single file or `glTF Separate (.gltf + .bin + textures)` if you prefer external assets.
5. Under **Include**, enable **Selected Objects** so only your chosen assets are exported.
6. Under **Mesh**, enable **Apply Modifiers** to bake the Geometry Nodes output.
7. Still under **Mesh**, under **Vertex Colors** ensure **All Vertex Colors** is enabled so per-point colors are written.
8. Check **Compression** box to shrink file size during export (adjust the level if needed, 6 is maximum compression value).
9. Click **Export glTF 2.0**.

![The export dialog window for glTF options in Blender 4.x. The settings have been optimized for point cloud export.](image-2.png)

> After export, review `documentation/gltf-transform-workflow.md` for optional gltf-transform steps to post-process or compress the file and greatly reduce file size.
